HTB SOC Analyst Notes











Incident handling definition and scope:

incident handling has become an important part of an organizations defensive capability against cybercrime. while protective measures are constantly being implemented to prevent or lower the amount of security incidents, an incident handling capability is undeniably a necessity for any organization that cannot afford a compromise of its data confidentiality, integrity, or availability. some organizations choose to implement this capability in house, while other rely on third party providers to support them, continuously or when needed. before we dive into the world of security incidents, lets define some terms and establish a common understanding of them.

an event is an action occurring in a system or network. examples of events are:

a user sending an email
a mouse click
a firewall allowing a connection request

an incident is an event with a negative consequence. one example of an incident is a system crash, another example is unauthorized access to sensitive data.

in the weaponize stage, the malware to be used for initial access is developed and embedded











Incident Handling:

prep, detect and analysis, containment eradication and recovery, post incident activity










Cyber Kill Chain:

recon, weaponize, deliver, exploit, install, c&c, action

the recon stage is the initial stage, and it involves the part where an attacker chooses their target. additionally the attacker then performs information gathering to become more familiar with the














DMARC:

is an email protection against phishing built on top of the already existing SPF and DKIM. the idea behind dmarc is to reject emails that pretend to originate from your organization. therefore if an adversary is spoofing an email pretending to be an employee asking for an invoice to be paid, the system will reject the email before it reaches the intended recipient.
















Endpoint Hardening (&EDR):

there are a few widely recognized endpoint hardening standards by now, with CIS and Microsoft baselines being the most popular, and these should really be the building blocks for your organizations hardening baselines. some highly important actions (that actually work to not and do something







Creation and Usage of IOCs:

an indicator of compromise is a sign that an incident has occurred. IOCs are documented in a structured manner, which represents the artifacts of the compromise. examples of IOCs can be IP addresses., hash values of files, and file names,. In fact, because IOCs are so important to an investigation, special languages such as Open







Elastic Stack:

created by elastic, is an open source collection of mainly three applications (Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana) that work in harmony to offer users comprehensive search and visualization capabilities for real time analysis and exploration of log file sources.

is distributed as JSON-based search engine, designed with RESTful APIs. as the core component of the elastic stack, it handles indexing, storing, and querying.












Analysis of Insight Nexus Breach:










































































































































dsds
