Coursera: ISC2 Healthcare Certificate







Types of Organizations in the Healthcare Sector:

healthcare delivery

health insurance

pharmaceutical industry

medical device and supply









Healthcare Delivery:

many different approaches have emerged to meet the increasing demand for modern healthcare. they include public clinics, nursing homes, pharmacies, hospitals, home-care programs, home meal programs, hospice, and durable medical equipment supplies. in some jurisdictions, these programs and services are undertaken solely at a local level. in others, regional or national approaches attempt to more efficiently deliver care. the interactions between social expectations, governmental policies, funding models, and technology drive the ultimate form taken by the healthcare system.

according to the world health organization (WHO), a health system "consists of all organizations, people, and actions whose primary intent is to promote, restore, or maintain health." in accomplishing this intent, a healthcare system must address services and management practices in several areas such as health service delivery, health workforce, well-functioning health information, medical products, vaccines, and technologies, health financing, leadership and governance

efficiently implemented and properly managed, these processes will drive improved health, increased responsiveness, social and financial risk protection, and improved efficiency. integrating these processes and their components into an effective whole makes the rate of change faster.














Funding:

as healthcare costs rise, concern increase about how government and private agencies decide to allocate funds for healthcare resources and services. decisions for healthcare funding are not made arbitrarily but are based on socioeconomic needs and practical considerations


funding methods are based on the WHO's methods of organizing and funding health services and their comparative benefits. many countries adopt a mix of the following funding methods to satisfy their populations needs. 










Five Most Common Healthcare Funding Methods:

national health services, are made possible by both direct and indirect tax revenues collected by a government to fund healthcare

social health insurance, is a system through which employers and employees make obligatory contributions. premiums are subsidized by the state for patients in high-risk categories and those who are not employed

private health insurance, is run by companies, usually for profit, and contributions are paid by individuals

out-of-pocket payment, those that compensate funding from other sources (general taxation or various insurance scheme), or those that cover the entire cost of treatment

charity/donations, charity care is healthcare provided for free or at reduced prices to low income













Accreditation:

helps ensure compliance with jurisdictional regulations; it also provides and objective evaluation of the quality of care so that organizations can improve their processes. accreditation is an important tool to communicate to patients, the workforce, and other stakeholders that the system meets appropriate requirements for healthcare delivery. government regulation, intermediary contracts, and the courts have assigned healthcare organizations responsibility for maintaining quality, cost, and access to their services

some organizations are international in scope. for example, the international society for quality in health care (ISQua) provides services to guide health professionals, providers, researchers, accrediting agencies, policy makers, and consumers to achieve excellence in healthcare delivery to all people and to continuously improve the quality and safety of care, ISQua is the organization responsible for endorsing many accrediting organizations, including the joint commission international (JCI), det norske veritas (DNV) healthcare which accredit hospitals, integrated delivery networks, ambulatory facilities, nursing homes, homecare organizations, behavioral health organizations, and clinical laboratories in more than 70 countries. although these organizations criteria are far more clinically oriented than governmental ort state permit programs, they address structural and process indicators and medical services from around the world











Organizational Challenges:

the demands on the marketplace are fundamental to the future development of healthcare organizations. regardless of whether the healthcare services are public or private, the first and clearest demand is to control the quality and cost of services. to meet these demands, healthcare organizations will emphasize their ability to integrate a continuum of care at higher levels of quality and satisfaction with service and value. particularly in the private US healthcare market, the trend has been to increasingly consolidate services both horizontally and vertically

vertical integration, occurs when physicians align with nonphysician partners such as hospitals, universities, medical schools, and other paramedical services. economic driving factors are unifies the supply chain under one roof or owner, and that each relationship produces a market-specific service that satisfies common demand, providing a one healthcare system with multiple services experience (e.g. physician, pharmacy, laboratory, and rehabilitation services within the same facility).

horizontal integration, occurs when healthcare organizations or physicians join existing organizations or groups and merge with each other to expand services under one healthcare system. economic driving factors are that it increases market share by association with merging or acquiring companies in adjacent or overlapping markets, and that it unifies marking capabilities to represent a common brand image














Types of Professionals:

employees of hospitals, doctors, and dentists offices, clinics, rehabilitation and nursing facilities, laboratories, and radiology centers are among the professions that provide care to patients. professionals may also practice independently under fee-for-service compensation

some professionals but not all are required to be licensed or certified by government agencies. other practitioners rely on professional associations to provide evidence of appropriate training

physicians are bound by the Hippocratic oath. recited by more than 90% if physicians graduating from medical school, the oath is a statement about a physicians ethical obligations and is widely respected by physicians. the oath expects a physician to treat the ill to the best of their ability, to preserve a patients privacy, and to teach the secrets of medicine to the next generation. in their treatment of patients, physicians receive extraordinary access to the private information of their patients. consequently the Hippocratic oath provides a basic framework for protecting the integrity of the profession and the privacy of the patients

providers, the term provider has different definitions in healthcare. a classic definition is a person who helps in identifying, preventing, or treating illness or disability. in the unites states, the centers for Medicare & Medicaid services (CMS) expands the definition of a health provider as an individual or an institution the provides healthcare services

national provider identity, the providers identity is essential to the delivery of healthcare services. who they are drives what they are legally allowed to do and to whom they deliver services. with the advent of data driven care and a desire to improve the overall success of patient treatments, accurate health provider identification (HPI) becomes vital. in the US, the national plan and provider enumeration system (NPPES) established a national provider identifier (NPI) registry to uniquely identify healthcare providers. it is national in scope and unique to the provider. the NPI is a unique, 10 position intelligence free numerical identifier that follows each provider throughout his or her career. this means that the numbers do not carry other information about the healthcare provider, such as the state in which they live or their medical specialty. this information must be shared when communicating electronic healthcare information between organizations

organized physician services, for centuries the delivery of healthcare was handled by independent physicians outside of a hospital, and the physician was responsible for the entire episode of care. although somewhat effective, this arrangement was not necessarily efficient. highly trained physicians often performed tasks that could have been accomplished by people with less training. to address the need for improvement of clinical quality and cost expectations, organized physician services were established to provide comprehensive care as an independent organization, capable of accepting contracts for large patient populations and managing their healthcare needs. while the organizational model is similar, these types of organizations use a variety of different names including independent physician associations (IPAs) or medical service organizations (MSOs)















Pharmaceutical Regulatory Bodies:

then pharmaceutical industry is the part of the healthcare segment that is concerned with the development, production, and marketing of medications. this sector includes drug manufacturers, drug marketers, and biotechnology companies

the objective of the pharmaceutical industry is to provide medicines that prevent infections, maintain health, and cure diseases, this affecting the global population. consequently, several international regulatory bodies oversee industry ethics, research, safety, patents, quality, and pricing. some of the regulatory bodies involved include world health organization (WHO), US food and drug administration (FDA), and medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA)(UK)
































































































































